+++
title = "7 - 10,001st Prime"
date = 2026-06-04
weight = 7
[extra]
doclink = "https://projecteuler.net/problem=7"
toc = true

[taxonomies]
categories = ["uiua-euler"]
tags = ["uiua", "euler"]
+++

## Problem

By listing the first six prime numbers: $2, 3, 5, 7, 11$, and $13$,
we can see that the $6$th prime is $13$.
What is the $10\,001$st prime number?

## Foundations

### Prime number checks with un reduce mul

*If you've recently looked at [chapter 3 on prime checks](@/uiua-some-euler-problems/03-largest-prime-factor.md#prime-number-checks)
then this will be familiar and you can skip this section*.

#### Length check

What happens when `un reduce mul` is called on a prime?

```uiua
    В°/Г— 19
[19]
    В°/Г— 21
[3 7]
    В°/Г— 23
[23]
    В°/Г— 29
[29]
```

It seems that `un reduce mul` returns an array that contains $N$ and only $N$
when $N$ is prime.

Therefore, a prime check might be to check the length

```uiua
    IsPrime вҶҗ =1 в§» В°/Г—
```

Let's get all primes under $100$. We can use `where` for this
after applying `IsPrime` to a range.
Since where is 0-indexed, we need to account for that with `+1`

```uiua
    +вӮҒвҠҡ вүЎIsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ100
[2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43 47 53 59 61 67 71 73 79 83 89 97]
```

#### Pervasion

Note that `un reduce mul` is pervasive.
Take the range $1-10.$

```uiua
    В°/Г— вҮЎвӮҒ10
в•ӯв”Җ
в•· 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1
  1 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 3 2
  1 2 3 2 5 3 7 2 3 5
                      в•Ҝ
```

Over this range, the largest collection of factors comes from $8$
which has prime factors $[2\ 2\ 2]$.
All other elements are padded with $1s.$
That does make sense since multiplying by $1$ doesn't change the result.
$1 * 2 * 5$ is just as much $10$ as $2 * 5.$

Well now, if a prime is entered, the last element of that column is the same
as the number which generated it.

```uiua
    В°/Г— [7 9 11]
в•ӯв”Җ
в•· 1 3  1
  7 3 11
         в•Ҝ
```

So if we get the last element of each

```uiua
    вҠЈ В°/Г— [7 9 11]
[7 3 11]
```

and preserve the original range for comparison

```uiua
    вҠЈ вҠёВ°/Г— [7 9 11]
[7 9 11]
[7 3 11]
```

then primes is where these arrays are equal.

```uiua
    в–Ҫ вҠё= вҠЈ вҠёВ°/Г— [7 9 11]
[7 11]
```

---

We can then define.

```uiua
    IsPrimePervasive вҶҗ =вҠҷ(вү 1) вҠё=вҠЈ вҠёВ°/Г—
    +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimePervasive вҮЎвӮҒ10
[2 3 5 7]
```

Note that we need to correct for 1 as it is not a prime number.

#### Difference in performance

On single checks, both should be fast enough for our purposes.
But what about a range of numbers?

A very **very** informal rule to keep in mind.

$$If\ it's\ rows,\ then\ it's\ slows!$$

Let's benchmark the prime checks on half a million elements.

```uiua
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(+вӮҒ вҠҡ вүЎIsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ500000)
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(+вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimePervasiveвҮЎвӮҒ500000)
0.41751933097839355
0.032407283782958984
```

The pervasive version is about 10x faster than
the prime checker that needs rows.

## Brute force solution

Wait a second. We can check half a million elements in ~0.03 seconds.
Can we just throw computation at this problem and see what happens?
Let's count how many primes this is. We can just sum it up since it
is $1s$ for primes and $0s$ else.

```uiua
    /+ IsPrimePervasiveвҮЎвӮҒ500000
41538
```

Wowee.
So, what if we just grab the 10001st one?

Let's use `where` for this. Remember to `add,1` for the offset.
What are the first 20? Does this look right?

```uiua
    вҶҷ20 +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimePervasiveвҮЎвӮҒ500000
[2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43 47 53 59 61 67 71]
```

Sure. Those are primes.
Let's just `pick` the 10001st one.
*We use 10000 because of 0-indexing*

```uiua
    вҠЎ 10000 +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimePervasiveвҮЎвӮҒ500000
104743
```

### How fast?

Fast.

```uiua
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(вҠЎ 10001 +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimePervasiveвҮЎвӮҒ500000)
0.030573606491088867
```

Though, this program doesn't feel satisfying, does it?
There is nothing smart about it. It just **smashes** through a range that
we picked at random.

## Can we do something smarter?

*Note: I'm to renaming `IsPrimePervasive` to `IsPrime` for the remainder of
this document*

```uiua
    IsPrime вҶҗ =вҠҷ(вү 1) вҠё=вҠЈ вҠёВ°/Г—
```

What we could try is to approach the bounds gradually.
We could just assume that for a range of length $X$, it's
fine to start searching for a range of size $2 \times X$ since
even numbers are not prime.

This range is likely not sufficient and therefore we keep
multiplying the range size by 2 until it contains our prime number.

We could do this with a `do` loop whose condition is
to check how many primes are over a range, and stop once
our desired index is available.

For the condition,
we can `reduce add` the `IsPrime` calculation on a range to get how many there
are. We continue if it is less than our target.

```uiua
    N           вҶҗ 10000
    DoCondition вҶҗ вүӨ N /+ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ
```

The `do` body should simply take the range size argument and double it.
The argument to the do body is the range size.

```uiua
    вҚў(Г—2|DoCondition) Г—2N
160000
```

Great. This tells us that the range 160000 includes the 10001st prime.

```uiua
    вҠЎN+вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҚў(Г—2|DoCondition) Г—2N 
104743
```

### How fast?

```uiua
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(вҠЎN+вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҚў(Г—2|DoCondition) Г—2N)
0.024101734161376953
```

This is about 0.006 seconds faster. That's not a lot.
If we think about it, it makes sense.
We check $10+20+40+80+160=310$ thousand numbers for the condition,
then we check a $160$ thousand numbers again.
That's $470$ thousand numbers vs randomly chosen $500$ thousand.
Surely we can do better?

### Math

The most optimal thing for this method is if we could somehow **know** the range
to check beforehand. A close second would be to speed up the calculation of
the `DoCondition`, preferably with a single calculation instead of
something over an ever increasing range.

There is a theorem for this close second.
Take a look at the [Prime Number Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number_theorem)
and the [Prime Counting Function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime-counting_function).

We define $\pi(x)$ as the prime counting function. This function gives us the
amount of primes that are less or equal to $x$.
The simple estimate is

$$ \pi(x) \sim \frac{x}{ln(x)}$$

> The natural logarithm in Uiua is attained with `un exp X` .
> See [exponential](https://www.uiua.org/docs/exponential)

The prime counting function article on Wikipedia seems to imply that the error
rises to at most ~15% and then drops as the numbers get larger. Keep this in mind.

Let's replace the `DoCondition` with the prime counting function.

We want to divide our input with the natural logarithm of said input.
We'll start with a fork

```uiua
    fork un exp id
    вҠғВ°вӮ‘ вҲҳ
```

Then we divide to attain
$$ \frac{x}{ln(x)}$$

```uiua
  div fork un exp id
  Г· вҠғВ°вӮ‘ вҲҳ
```

We'll store this as function `P` and rewrite our `DoCondition`.

```uiua
    P вҶҗ Г· вҠғВ°вӮ‘ вҲҳ
    N           вҶҗ 10000
    DoCondition вҶҗ вүӨ N P
```

Now, let's see if this gives us the same result as our former `do` loop.

```uiua
    вҚў(Г—2|DoCondition) Г—2N
160000
```

Yes. It is the same. However, our `DoCondition` is much faster now, since it
doesn't calculate over the same range it outputs.
We can get away with a much lower increment to get closer to the real range.
Let's try a factor of 1.001 and
let's also add in our worst case error correction of ~15%.

```uiua
    вҢҲ Г— 1.15 вҚў(Г—1.001|DoCondition) Г—1.001 N
134306

```

Now, is the factor of $1.001$ slow enough to be significant?

```uiua
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(вҢҲ Г— 1.15 вҚў(Г—1.001|DoCondition) Г—1.001 N)
0.00435948371887207
```

No, not at all.
Putting it all together

```uiua
    вҠЎ N +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҢҲ Г— 1.15 вҚў(Г—1.001|DoCondition) Г—1.001 N
104743

# And speed?
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(вҠЎ N +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҢҲ Г— 1.15 вҚў(Г—1.001|DoCondition) Г—1.001 N)
0.01471567153930664
```

## Extra credit - Big Primes

Let's see how our range doubling and prime-counting versions
fare against bigger primes.

According to [bigprimes.net](https://www.bigprimes.net/archive/prime/1000000)
the 1000001st prime is $15485867.$

### Range doubling method

We re-initialize `N` and `DoCondition` to the new parameters.

```uiua
    N           вҶҗ 1000000
    DoCondition вҶҗ вүӨ N /+ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ
```

and then run the final program as before

```uiua
    вҠЎN+вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҚў(Г—2|DoCondition) Г—2N
15485867
```

Great. It gives us the correct answer. But how fast?

```uiua
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(вҠЎN+вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҚў(Г—2|DoCondition) Г—2N)
3.39035964012146
```

Ok. Not too bad.

### Prime counting method

Adjusting to the new parameters

```uiua
    P вҶҗ Г· вҠғВ°вӮ‘ вҲҳ
    N           вҶҗ 1000000
    DoCondition вҶҗ вүӨ N P
```

and running our final program as before.

```uiua
    вҠЎ N +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҢҲ Г— 1.15 вҚў(Г—1.001|DoCondition) Г—1.001 N
15485867
```

Great. Also correct, but is it faster?

```uiua
    вҠҷв—ҢвҚңnow(вҠЎ N +вӮҒ вҠҡ IsPrimeвҮЎвӮҒ вҢҲ Г— 1.15 вҚў(Г—1.001|DoCondition) Г—1.001 N)
1.5464730262756348
```

Yeah. About twice as fast. Remember, that the error goes down as we check
higher and higher primes.
Lowering the error correction to $5%$ is about 100ms faster.
