+++
title = "2 - Even Fibonacci"
date = 2026-05-04
weight = 2
[extra]
doclink = "https://projecteuler.net/problem=2"
toc = true

[taxonomies]
categories = ["uiua-euler"]
tags = ["uiua", "euler", "fibonacci"]
+++

## Problem

Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous
two terms. By starting with $1$ and $2$, the first $10$ terms will be:
$$1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, \dots$$
By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed
four million, find the sum of the even-valued terms.

## Foundations and research before you begin

### Recursion, tree explosion, memoization

```uiua
# file: p2-bad.ua

# Bad Fibonacci Helper
BFH ← |1 (
  ⨬(+⊃(BFH -2|BFH -1)|1)⊸≤1
)
BF ← ≡BFH⇡
BF 30
```

First hint that a tree explosion is taking place is the fact that we need to
set a higher recursion limit.
Getting the first thirty numbers takes around 5 seconds on my laptop.

```bash
time UIUA_RECURSION_LIMIT=1000 uiua run p2-bad.ua
[1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144 233 377 610 987 1597 2584 4181 6765 10946 17711 28657 46368 75025 121393 196418 317811 514229 832040]
uiua run p2-bad.ua  4,97s
```

There is a workaround to this by using the `memo` modifier.

```uiua
# Better Fibonacci Helper
BFH ← |1 memo(
  ⨬(+⊃(BFH -2|BFH -1)|1)⊸≤1
)
BF ← ≡BFH⇡
BF 30
```

After memo-izing the recursive call, this program finishes near instantly on my
laptop. A far cry from 5 seconds.
You can even run it in the [pad](https://uiua.org/pad?src=0_19_0-dev_3__eJxTVnBKLSlJLVJwy0zKz0tMTs5U8EjNKUgt4nJy81B41DZBocZQITc1N1-DS0Hh0Yo1GtqPupo1QHK6RjVgylCzxlDzUdeOR51LDLk0uZzcwLoedS50cvN41L4QJGBswAUAdpwk5Q==)
since the memo prevents the subsequent calls to the recursive Fibonacci
function from digging down and causing a recursion limit error.

However, if you change `BF = BFH range` to `BF = BFH rev range` you
will end up having a recursion limit error since going backwards doesn't calculate
the lower Fibonacci numbers first.

## Towards the solution

**WIP: make the memoized solution**

**WIP: make the iterative solution**

Iterative solution:

```uiua
    /+ ▽¬ ⊸◿ 2⍢(◡+|<4000000⋅) ∩1
4613732
```
